***********************************************
* IR transfer between a PC and the HP38/39/48 *
***********************************************

There are several questions about transferring data from a PC to a HP and vice
versa using the Infrared port.


1) Hardware
-----------

Some theoretical aspects:

Pulse width:
 HP transmitter : typ = 52us, min = 46.8us, max = 57.2us
 HP receiver    : typ = 52us, min = 40.0us, max = 80.0us
 IrDA: 3/16 of Baudrate = 1/2400*3/16 = 78us or 1.6us
Wavelength:
 HP: 940nm
 IrDA: 850..900nm

Remember: You can only use this interface to connect with the 2400 Baud serial
protocol, connecting the HP82240B infrared printer isn't possible.

The first problem we have is the pulse width. If your PC IrDA interface is
generating the pulse width with 3/16 of the baudrate it's OK, but there are
several interfaces out there, which are using a 1.6us pulse width for all
baudrates. That's too short for the HP IR interface, so no chance to get it
working.


2) Software protocol layer
--------------------------

Next we have to distinguish between the software protocol layers. The IrDA 1.0
specification describes the hardware and the software protocol stack layer. The
IrDA protocol stack defines several parts for data transport, especially the
framing of the data. The framing isn't compatible with the HP one. An optional
component is the IrCOMM layer which shows the IrDA hardware as virtual COM port.
Here the application itself can make the framing. So you need an operating
system which can access the IrCOMM layer of the IrDA hardware. The newer
Microsoft Windows operating systems have an integrated IrDA support. That causes
also problems. Here are my experiences with some MS Windows versions.


3) Operating system
-------------------

I tested an Infrared connection with a Tekram IRmate IR-220 for motherboard
connection supported by the BIOS on COM2 and with the IrDA interface of a Compaq
Armada 1570D Laptop (fixed a resource problem with the factory setting of the
IrDA port first). The testing distance was 5..30cm.

- Win95:

Only tested on the laptop, here it worked.

- Win98:

Only tested on the PC. Doesn't work, even when I disable the IrDA driver. I
don't know what going wrong. Perhaps my fault.

- WinNT4.0 SP3:

Only tested on the PC. Worked with the Tekram IRmate IR-220 IR module.

- Win2k SP1:

Only tested on the PC. In this operating system the needed IrCOMM protocol stack
layer for virtual COM ports is missing, so you need a 3rd party product. I tried
it with a software driver for mobile phones, but it also don't work.


4) Terminal applications
------------------------

For the first test I used a HP48 and Emu48 as software on the PC (OS NT4.0) and
on the Laptop (OS Win95). I transferred an UserRpl file in binary mode. Both
hardware works.

As second test software I used MS-DOS Kermit 2.32/A. I tried to transfer the
same UserRpl file in binary mode as before. With the Tekram adapter this work,
the Compaq transfer fail!

In general, the biggest problem is that you get IR reflections from the
transmitter to your receiver while transmitting data. Before you receive the
answer, the software has to clear the receive buffer. Some IrDA receiver
hardware does this without software support, so most communication software will
run on this hardware. Emu48 has no problems, because the original HP romcode is
running, the HP clears the receive buffer after transmitting data. Most popular
transfer software doesn't clear it's receive buffer after transmitting, so it
mostly depends on your hardware if the IR transfer works. The Temic
IrDA-Transceiver TFDS3000 for example has problems with the IR reflections from
the transmitter, the newer TFDS4000 or TFDS4500 doesn't.

So that's the reason of the different behavior or the Tekram IRmate IR-220 and
of the Compaq Armada 1570D Laptop. The Tekram IRmate clears the IR reflections
by hardware, the Laptop doesn't. Emu48, or better the emulated calculator, takes
care about the reflections, so it worked also on the Laptop in this case.


5) Result
---------

The IR transfer with IrDA hardware between PC and HP calculator might work, but
because of the many exceptions, explained above, it mostly will fail.


06/27/01 (c) by Christoph Gieﬂelink, cgiess@swol.de
